
# Text Mining for Urban Farming: gaining new insights by synthesising archaeological and archaeobotanical research with the help of computational methods and conventional analyses

Authors: Ronald M. Visser[^1], Anja Fischer[^2], Annika L. Blonk-van den
Bercken[^3] & Heleen van Londen[^4]

This reposistory contains the presentation given during the IWGP 2025 in
Groningen (<https://archaeobotany.org/iwgp2025/>) on Monday July 21,
2025. This presentation was presented in the session “Session 9: The
Archaeobotany of Settlements and Urban Landscapes”.

The presentation can be viewed at:
<https://ronaldvisser.github.io/TextMiningUrbanFarming_IWGP2025>. A PDF
is also available
([Text_Mining_for_Urban_Farming.pdf](Text_Mining_for_Urban_Farming.pdf)),
but this is a less optimal format for the presentation. The PDF was
rendered with:
`decktape --chrome-arg=--allow-file-access-from-files reveal ./docs/index.html Text_Mining_for_Urban_Farming.pdf`
.

# Abstract (as submitted for the conference)

Urban farming is about food production for and by town dwellers and is
partly known from documentary evidence. While research on urban farming
in the Netherlands exists, the topic has nevertheless remained
relatively underexposed in terms of historical, archaeological and
archaeobotanical research. In a recently published volume, evidence for
urban farming in Dutch towns between 1250 up to 1850 has been presented
(Fischer et al. 2021). In this synthesizing research we applied an
innovative method that combines text mining with conventional reading
and analysing (grey) literature from commercially funded urban
excavations in the Netherlands carried out between 1997 and 2017. A list
of relevant (archaeobotanical) keywords was used to mine the text of
1380 published reports. This technique was used to filter relevant
reports for further in-depth analyses, generating diachronic data on
historic farming in 84 towns. The method that we applied is innovative,
transparent and open. We have made all code of the analyses available
(Visser 2022), because we value Open Science and reproducibility. In the
research quantitative and qualitative approaches were combined to
understand the nature of urban farming in the Netherlands, resulting in
the discovery of small details and large patterns during this long and
dynamic time period. In this interdisciplinary paper we will explore
three main themes: methodology, results and future applications for and
beyond archaeobotany.

# References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-fischer2021" class="csl-entry">

Fischer, A. D., H. van Londen, A. L. Blonk-van den Bercken, R. M.
Visser, and J. Renes. 2021. *Urban Farming and Ruralisation in the
Netherlands (1250 up Tot the Nineteenth Century), Unravelling Farming
Practice and the Use of (Open) Space by Synthesising Archaeological
Reports Using Text Mining*. Nederlandse Archeologische Rapporten 68.
Amersfoort: Rijksdienst voor het Cultureel Erfgoed.
<https://www.cultureelerfgoed.nl/publicaties/publicaties/2021/01/01/urban-farming-and-ruralisation-in-the-netherlands>.

</div>

<div id="ref-visser" class="csl-entry">

Visser, Ronald M. 2022. “Text Mining of Archaeological Reports for Urban
Farming (Data and Code).” <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7157759>.

</div>

</div>

[^1]: Saxion University of Applied Sciences.

[^2]: Universiteit van Amsterdam.

[^3]: NMF Erfgoed.

[^4]: Universiteit van Amsterdam.
